---
title: |
 ProblemSet 1 -- Optimization
author: George McNinch
date: 2025-01-24 
---

1. An optimization question in widget manufacturing
------------------------

A manufacturing firm makes a profit of `$`1200 per unit on the sale of
a product known as a widget. The firm hopes to increase widget sales
by offering a rebate; after some number-crunching, it is estimated
that for every `$`100 of rebate, the number of widgets sold in a given
month will increase by 15%.

a. What amount of rebate will maximize the manufacturers profit for
   the month? Model the question as a single-variable optimization
   problem.

b. Compute the *sensitivity* of your answer to the 15%
   assumption. Consider both the amount of rebate and the resulting
   profit.

c. Suppose that rebates actually generate only a 10% increase in sales
   per `$`100. What is the effect? What if the response is somewhere
   between 10% and 15% per `$`100 of rebate?

d. Under what circumstances would an offer of a rebate cause a
   reduction in profit?
   

2. Computing yields with multi-variate optimization
-----------

A chemist is synthesizing a compound. In the last step, she must dissolve her reagents in a
solution with a particular `pH` level $H$, for $1.2 ≤ H ≤ 2.7$, and heated to a temperature $T$ (in
degrees Celsius), for $66 ≤ T ≤ 98$. Her goal is to maximize her percent yield as a percentage
of the initial mass of the reagents. 

The equation determining the percentage $F (H,T)$ is 

$$F(H,T) = −0.038\cdot T^2 − 0.223 \cdot T\cdot H − 10.982 \cdot H^2 +
7.112 \cdot T + 60.912 \cdot H − 328.898.$$

1. Find the optimal temperature and `pH` level in the allowed range.

2. Use `matplotlib` to produce a graph and a contour plot of the percentage of the powder
function $F (H, T )$.

(You should consult this week's `jupyter notebooks` to see some
examples. To get a usable copy of your image, you can proceed in a few
ways:

  - if you produce the graph in colab you can right-click on the image
    and `Save As` a file on your file system.
  - if you work in Python on your computer, you can save the image via
    a command like

    ```
    > g.savefig(”myGraphImage.png”)
    ```

