---
title: |
 ProblemSet 1 -- Optimization
author: George McNinch
date: 2025-01-24 
---

1. An optimization question in auto manufacturing
------------------------

A manufacturing firm makes a profit of `$`1200 per unit on the sale of
a product known as a widget. The firm hopes to increase widget sales
by offering a rebate; after some number-crunching, it is estimated
that for every `$`100 of rebate, the number of widgets sold in a given
month will increase by 15%.

a. What amount of rebate will maximize the manufacturers profit for
   the month? Model the question as a single-variable optimization
   problem.

b. Compute the *sensitivity* of your answer to the 15%
   assumption. Consider both the amount of rebate and the resulting
   profit.

c. Suppose that rebates actually generate only a 10% increase in sales
   per `$`100. What is the effect? What if the response is somewhere
   between 10% and 15% per `$`100 of rebate?

d. Under what circumstances would an offer of a rebate cause a
   reduction in profit?
   

2. Computing yields with multi-variate optimization
-----------

A chemist is synthesizing a compound. In the last step, she must dissolve her reagents in a
solution with a particular `pH` level $H$, for $1.2 ≤ H ≤ 2.7$, and heated to a temperature $T$ (in
degrees Celsius), for $66 ≤ T ≤ 98$. Her goal is to maximize her percent yield as a percentage
of the initial mass of the reagents. 

The equation determining the percentage $F (H,T)$ is 

$$F(H,T) = −0.038\cdot T^2 − 0.223 \cdot T\cdot H − 10.982 \cdot H^2 +
7.112 \cdot T + 60.912 \cdot H − 328.898.$$

1. Find the optimal temperature and `pH` level in the allowed range.

2. Use `matplotlib` to produce a graph and a contour plot of the percentage of the powder
function $F (H, T )$.

(You should consult this week's `jupyter notebooks` to see some
examples. To get a usable copy of your image, you can proceed in a few
ways:

  - if you produce the graph in colab you can right-click on the image
    and `Save As` a file on your file system.
  - if you work in Python on your computer, you can save the image via
    a command like

    ```
    > g.savefig(”myGraphImage.png”)
    ```

3. Blood typing
--------------

Human blood is generally classified in the “ABO” system, with four
blood types: `A`, `B`, `O`, and `AB`. These four types reflect six
gene pairs, with blood type `A` corresponding to gene pairs `AA` and
`AO`, blood type `B` corresponding to gene pairs `BB` and `BO`, blood
type `O` corresponding to gene pair `OO`, and blood type `AB`
corresponding to gene pair `AB`. Let $p$ be the proportion of gene `A`
in the population, let $q$ be the proportion of gene `B` in the
population, and let $r$ be the proportion of gene `O` in the
population. For example, the quantity $p$ represents the ratio of the
total number of *blood-type genes* of type `A` to the total number of
*blood-type genes*. Since each blood-type gene is either `A`, `B` or
`O`, it is clear that $p + q + r = 1$.


a. [The Hardy-Weinberg
   principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hardy%E2%80%93Weinberg_principle)
   implies that:

   > $(\clubsuit)$ The quantities $p$, $q$, and $r$ remain constant from
   > generation to generation, as do the frequencies of occurrence of
   > the different genotypes  `AA`, `AO`, ... .

   Assuming the validity of $(\clubsuit)$, what is the probability
   that an individual has genotype `AA`? `BB`? `OO`? What is the
   probability of an individual having two different genes?  Express
   your response using the quantities $p$, $q$ and $r$.

b. Still assuming the valiidty of $(\clubsuit)$, find the maximum
   percentage of the population that can have two different genes.
   Perform this computation in two different ways:
 
   >  - directly maximize a function of only two variables
   >  - use the method of Lagrange multipliers.

c. Explain in words what the Lagrange multiplier represents in the
   second computation of part (b).




4. Newton's method and root finding
-----------------------------------

a. microprocessors

   One of the uses of Newton’s method is in implementing division on
   microprocessors, where only addition and multiplication are
   available as primitive operations. To compute $x = a/b$, first the
   root of $f(x) = 1/x − b$ is found using Newton’s method, then the
   fraction is computed with one last multiplication by $a$.

   Find the Newton iteration needed to solve $f(x) = 0$ and explain
   why it is well-suited to this purpose. (**Note**: The point here is
   to approximate division, so you shouldn’t use division functions
   implemented in `python`!)

b. experiments

   Apply Newton’s Method to compute $1/b$, where $b$ is: (i) the last
   3 digits of your student number; and (ii) the area code of your
   phone number. For these experiments, report the number of
   iterations required for the approximation to be consistent to 10
   digits.
