---
title: |
 ProblemSet 2 -- Optimization
author: George McNinch
date: 2025-01-31
---

1. Blood typing
--------------

Human blood is generally classified in the “ABO” system, with four
blood types: `A`, `B`, `O`, and `AB`. These four types reflect six
gene pairs, with blood type `A` corresponding to gene pairs `AA` and
`AO`, blood type `B` corresponding to gene pairs `BB` and `BO`, blood
type `O` corresponding to gene pair `OO`, and blood type `AB`
corresponding to gene pair `AB`. Let $p$ be the proportion of gene `A`
in the population, let $q$ be the proportion of gene `B` in the
population, and let $r$ be the proportion of gene `O` in the
population. For example, the quantity $p$ represents the ratio of the
total number of *blood-type genes* of type `A` to the total number of
*blood-type genes*. Since each blood-type gene is either `A`, `B` or
`O`, it is clear that $p + q + r = 1$.


a. [The Hardy-Weinberg
   principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hardy%E2%80%93Weinberg_principle)
   implies that:

   > $(\clubsuit)$ The quantities $p$, $q$, and $r$ remain constant from
   > generation to generation, as do the frequencies of occurrence of
   > the different genotypes  `AA`, `AO`, ... .

   Assuming the validity of $(\clubsuit)$, what is the probability
   that an individual has genotype `AA`? `BB`? `OO`? What is the
   probability of an individual having two different genes?  Express
   your response using the quantities $p$, $q$ and $r$.

b. Still assuming the valiidty of $(\clubsuit)$, find the maximum
   percentage of the population that can have two different genes.
   Perform this computation in two different ways:
 
   >  - directly maximize a function of only two variables
   >  - use the method of Lagrange multipliers.

c. Explain in words what the Lagrange multiplier represents in the
   second computation of part (b).


2. Newton's method and root finding
-----------------------------------

a. microprocessors

   One of the uses of Newton’s method is in implementing division on
   microprocessors, where only addition and multiplication are
   available as primitive operations. To compute $x = a/b$, first the
   root of $f(x) = 1/x − b$ is found using Newton’s method, then the
   fraction is computed with one last multiplication by $a$.

   Find the Newton iteration needed to solve $f(x) = 0$ and explain
   why it is well-suited to this purpose. (**Note**: The point here is
   to approximate division, so you shouldn’t use division functions
   implemented in `python`!)

b. experiments

   Apply Newton’s Method to compute $1/b$, where $b$ is: (i) the last
   3 digits of your student number; and (ii) the area code of your
   phone number. For these experiments, report the number of
   iterations required for the approximation to be consistent to 10
   digits.


3. A linear program
-------------

   Consider the optimization problem: find the $\max$ of $f(x, y) = x + 2y$ subject to the
   following constraints:
   
   \begin{align*}
   y &\le 9 \\
   −y &\le −1 \\
   2x + y &≤ 25 \\
   −2x − y &≤ −9 \\
   −2x + y &≤ 1 \\
   2x − y &≤ 15.
   \end{align*}
   
   a. Draw the feasible region. Label the boundary curves and corner points.

   b. Find the maximum value of f subject to the constraints and the
      point where it occurs.

   c. Verify your answer using `SciPy`.

4. Bakers
---------------

   A bakery wants to sell forty five Valentine’s Day gift bags. They
   have decided to offer two types of bags: 
   
   - Bags of type A will contain four cupcakes and two cookies, and
     will be sold for $12
   
   - bags of type B will contain two cupcakes and five cookies, and
     will be sold for $16
   
   The bakery has 90 cookies and 115 cupcakes in total.  Write the
   bakery’s optimization problem as a linear program. Solve this to
   determine how many baskets of both types should be made. If a
   fractional solution is obtained, round down to whole number
   solutions. What is the maximum profit? 
   
   You may solve this by drawing the feasible region or using python.

5. Wheat vs corn
---------

   A farmer owns 45 acres of land. This season, she will plant each
   acre with either wheat or corn. Each acre of wheat yields \$200 in
   seasonal profits, whereas each acre of corn yields \$300 in
   seasonal profits. Each acre of wheat requires 3 workers and 2 tons
   of fertilizer, while each acre of corn requires 2 workers and 4
   tons of fertilizer. The farmer has 100 workers and 120 tons of
   fertilizer available. Determine how many acres of wheat and corn
   need to be planted to maximize profits for the season. (Non-integer
   acreage values are allowed in the solution.)
