---
title: |
 ProblemSet 3 -- Dual linear programs
author: George McNinch
date: 2024-02-09 
---

---
title: PS 3 -- Duality of linear programs & dual prices
author: George McNinch
date: 2020-10-04 
---


1. Consider the primal linear program

`` Maximize``
$$11x + 5y$$
``subject to``
$$\begin{bmatrix}
1 & 1 \\
10 & 4
\end{bmatrix}
\begin{bmatrix}
x \\ y
\end{bmatrix}
\le \begin{bmatrix}
7 \\
40
\end{bmatrix} \quad
\text{and}
\quad
\begin{bmatrix}
x \\ y
\end{bmatrix} \ge \mathbf{0}$$


  a. Write the dual linear program.
  
  b. Find the optimal solution to both the primal and the dual linear
  programs. You may do this using ``python``'s ``linprog``, or by
  plotting the feasible sets. Confirm that both the strong duality
  theorem and complementary slackness are satisfied.  What are the
  dual prices of each of the constraints?
  
  c. Does the dual price provide an accurate prediction of the
  increase in the primal objective function when the right-hand side
  of the first constraint is increased from 7 to 8?  From 7 to 9?
  From 7 to 11?

-----

2. Consider the linear program

   ``maximize`` $\quad y + z$
   
   ``subject to`` 
   $\quad \mathbf{x} = \begin{bmatrix} x \\ y \\ z  \end{bmatrix} \ge 0$
   
   and $A \mathbf{x} \le \mathbf{b}$
   
   where $A = \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 1 & -1 \end{bmatrix}$
   and $\mathbf{b} = \begin{bmatrix} 10 \\ 1 \end{bmatrix}$.
   
   a. What is the value of the objective function at points of the
      form 
	  
	  $$\mathbf{p}(c,t) = \begin{bmatrix} c \\ 0 \\ 0 \end{bmatrix} +
      t\begin{bmatrix} 0 \\ 1 \\ 1 \end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix}
      c\\t\\t \end{bmatrix} \quad c,t \in \mathbb{R}?$$
   
   b. Under what conditions on $c,t$ is the point $\mathbf{p}(c,t)$
      in the *feasible region* of the linear program?
   
   c. Does the linear program have an optimal solution?
   
   d. What is the dual linear program? Does the dual linear program
      have any feasible points? Does it have an optimal solution?
	  
----


3. An author of a dystopian novel wants to write a scene in which a
   characters plans and builds a *doomsday shelter* under his
   home. 
   
   In the novel, the character will store food supplies in a large underground
   storage container, which has 50 liters of storage in which he will
   store `dried beans` and `rice`.
   
   It seems at least somewhat realistic to  expect that a liter of beans
   provides nutrition for approx. 9 days, while a liter of rice
   provides nutrition for approx. 5 day.
   
   Each liter of beans costs \$12.0 and each liter of rice costs $5.00.
   
   The character will spend \$60. 
   
   a. Write the primal and dual linear programs. 
   
      In each case, indicate the variables, the objective, and the
      constraints.
   
   b. Find solutions to both the primal and dual linear
      programs. Confirm that both the `strong duality theorem` and
      `complementary slackness` hold.

   c. Indicate and explain the *dual prices* for each of the `primal`
      constraints.

   d. Suppose the author had instead envisioned a storage container
      holding an additional `c` liters of food. Does the dual price
      for this modified constraint provide an accurate prediction for
      the increase in the primal objective function (i.e. for the
      number of days of nutrition provided?)
